IBX-10709: Tracking modes and events - Raptor integration (#3110)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/cdp/raptor_integration/tracking_event_function.md

---
description: Raptor tracking function.
---

# Raptor tracking function

Raptor [tracking function](https://content.raptorservices.com/help-center/introduction-to-tracking-documentation) introduces visit tracking functionality for collecting user interactions with products and content.

> The implementation includes product visit tracking with mapping to tracking parameters and automatic price formatting, as well as Twig functions for straightforward integration.

Reviewer: The mention of automatic price formatting feels out of place, and is never explained - I don't know what it means to be honest

Author: Old PR description, can be removed I guess

> It supports multi-currency setups with automatic decimal formatting (0, 2, or 3 decimals) based on configuration, and integrates with taxonomy to extract and format category paths for product categorization.

Reviewer: 1. Add a link to Taxonomy
2. This configuration of decimal formatting is never described?

Author: This is a part of old PR description, we can remove it

## Initialize Raptor tracking script

First, initialize the `ibexa_tracking_script()` tracking script in your base layout template, typically within the <head> section or before the closing <body> tag:

``` html+twig
{# templates/base.html.twig #}
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
    {# ... other head content ... #}

    {# Initialize Raptor tracking - must be called before any tracking events #}
    {{ ibexa_tracking_script() }}
</head>
<body>
    {# ... page content ... #}
</body>
</html>
```

## Tracking parameters

Tracking is handled through twig function that accept following parameters:

``` html+twig
ibexa_tracking_track_event(
    eventType,     {# string: 'visit', 'contentvisit', 'buy', 'basket', 'itemclick' #}

>     data,          {# mixed: Product, Content, or null (optional) #}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    data,          {# mixed: product, content, or null (optional) #}
```
`product` and `content` are contextual variables available in views.

    context,       {# array: additional context data (optional) #}
    template       {# string: custom template path (optional) #}
)
```

- **eventType** - type: string, defines the type of tracking event to be sent, for example, `visit`, `contentvisit`, `buy`, `basket`, `itemclick`

> - **data** (optional) - type: mixed, defines the primary object associated with the event, such as a Product or Content, can be null if not required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **data** (optional) - type: mixed, accepts the primary object associated with the event, such as a Product or Content, can be null if not required
```

Looking at the code, the built-in supported types are:

Content Visit: Content
Itemclick: product id (is product id the same as product code)?
Visit, Buy, Basket: ProductInterface

and we should narrow this down (and maybe show how to implement a custom `EventMappingStrategyInterface`? or that would be an overkill?)

Reviewer 2: > is product id the same as product code

Yes. What's important is that product id has to reference uniquely a @copilot specific product with an arbitrary string. So 2 different products cannot use the same ID and the ID should come from PIM (whether it's DXP PIM or a remote PIM like Quable).

> and we should narrow this down (and maybe show how to implement a custom `EventMappingStrategyInterface`? or that would be an overkill?)

Not sure, POV ping @tbialcz

Reviewer 3: Regarding EventMappingStrategyInterface, I think including it here might be overkill for this basic reference doc. If needed, custom event mapping could be covered in a separate “Advanced customization” section with a proper implementation example.

You can use `context` parameter to add additional data.

During tracking, for products assigned to multiple categories, the system uses the first category.
In this case, `context` parameter allows to override the product category by passing a category identifier:

``` html+twig
{% block content %}
    <div class="product-details">
        <h1>{{ product.name }}</h1>
        {# ... product content ... #}
    </div>

    {# Track with category identifier - automatic loading and formatting #}
    {{ ibexa_tracking_track_event('visit', product, {
        'categoryIdentifier': 'electronics'
    }) }}
{% endblock %}
```

## Tracking modes

Tracking user interactions can be implemented on the client-side or the server-side.
Each approach differs in where events are captured and how they are sent to the tracking backend.
The `ibexa_tracking_track_event()` function works based on `tracking_type` configuration.

The tracking function outputs different content depending on the mode:

``` yaml
# Server-side tracking
connector_raptor:
    tracking_type: 'server'  # Returns HTML comments

# Client-side tracking
connector_raptor:
    tracking_type: 'client'  # Returns <script> tags
```

> - **server** - returns HTML comments, leaving placeholders without running JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **server** - returns HTML comments, placeholders that do not perform any action. Instead, the tracking is done server-side.
```
The current description omits what happens, it states "server side returns HTML comments (which do nothing)"

- **client** - returns `script` tags to load the tracking script in the browser.

You can switch tracking mode anytime by changing the `tracking_type` parameter.

For more information on Tracking modes, see Raptor documentation:

- [Client-side tracking](https://content.raptorservices.com/help-center/client-side-tracking)
- [Server-side tracking](https://content.raptorservices.com/help-center/server-side-tracking)
- [Client-side vs. Server-side tracking](https://content.raptorservices.com/help-center/client-side-vs.-server-side-tracking)

## Advanced usage – direct interaction with the service

### `EventMapper` method

The recommended method, providing full control over event tracking, is `EventMapper` method.

> It allows to interact directly with the service, supporting advanced configuration beyond what the Page Builder offers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows to interact directly with the service, supporting advanced use cases not covered by default implementation.
```
Page Builder does not offer tracking at all? And it's customization, not configuration?

Reviewer 2: > Page Builder does not offer tracking at all? 

`ibexa_tracking_script` and `ibexa_tracking_track_event` Twig functions provide the actual tracking. They can be used in Headless, while PB for displaying recommendations is available in Experience.

> And it's customization, not configuration?

Depends on the doc language usually used. It's mostly about embedding tracking Twig function into templates or using the service, and mapping, and custom controllers. So for me it's rather customization.

use Symfony\Component\EventDispatcher\EventSubscriberInterface;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\Event\ResponseEvent;
use Symfony\Component\HttpKernel\KernelEvents;

class ProductViewTrackingSubscriber implements EventSubscriberInterface
{
    public function __construct(
        private readonly EventMapperInterface $eventMapper,
        private ServerSideTrackingDispatcherInterface $trackingDispatcher,
    ) {}

    public static function getSubscribedEvents(): array
    {
        return [KernelEvents::RESPONSE => ['onResponse', -10]];
    }

    public function onResponse(ResponseEvent $event): void
    {
        if (!$event->isMainRequest()) {
            return;
        }

        $request = $event->getRequest();

        // Example: track only if request has specific attribute
        $product = $request->attributes->get('product');
        if (!$product) {
            return;
        }

        $eventData = $this->eventMapper->map(EventType::VISIT, $product);
        $this->trackingDispatcher->dispatch($eventData);
    }
}
```

## Tracking events

The following events are supported and can be triggered from Twig templates:

> ### Product Visit event

Reviewer: Note: if I understand correctly, in code the event type is `visit`? There's no "Product Visit"?

Author: Yes, but there's a visit for product and content. I'll update with `visit`

Reviewer 2: >> Note: if I understand correctly, in code the event type is `visit`? There's no "Product Visit"?
>
> Yes, but there's a visit for product and content. I'll update with `visit`

Content visits should use dedicated `contentvisit` event. `visit` applies to products.
